Design Manifesto
======
As with any computer science class, there is a paradigm shift that occurs in your thinking as the semester progresses. For Human Computer Interaction in particular, you begin to start noticing the effectiveness of the design of everything you use, in a more detailed way. Small things like doors handles begin to tell stories. Why was it made this way? Who were the designers appealing to and why? Is it effective? It is almost as if you have learned to analyze literature or art. Everything tells a story, and what I have found is that this story often sounds very familiar. With this class in conjunction with others I have taken in my academic career at Williams it becomes evident why so many systems fail so spectacularly. The research and testing of their design obviously centers around whiteness, straightness, and such qualities considered “normal.” After taking Human Computer Interaction, it is quite evident that the power of behind design is in diversity. 

Diversity
------
Design is nothing without diversity. On a very shallow level, most of your design and function will be informed by the people you gather data from in the numerous ideating and research phases of the design. New ideas are mostly just associations made up in the mind, and it is hard to create those unique associations without a mountain of other data collected from people with other experiences. It must be added that to get unique ideas, the data cannot be all well-off white people. People of color, disabled people, neuro-divergent people, people of all genders and sexualities, must be included and to the same degree as white people. The only caveat being if the user base is very specific (A dating website for Black gay people for example). This also prevents the designer from creating something too general or conversely something patronizing (such as lighter, pink pens for women).

In the making of CommUnity we only had the space to conduct [semi-structured interviews](https://pelite376.github.io/ciReview/), and from my point of view this shows in the design. We lean on our tasks to justify the design due to the form we chose, but one has to question how viable the theoretical function would be. It does not ring as particularly effective, but we lack more intimate knowledge of how social movements live and die. While an ethnographer probably would not have the practical knowledge we needed, an organizer would provide the focus that I think our projects lack. If there were more time, somewhere during the first user tests or before when we first took note of this deficiency, we would go back and collect more diverse user research in order to aid how to change the tasks to fit the goal. 

The power of Many Ideas
------
While most of my manifesto focuses squarely on diversity in terms of identity, when generating ideas in the very beginning before even user research, I must include the instructions to use big large ideas that initially seem unlikely. You need a wide berth of ideas in order to create a unique solution, not for the sake of uniqueness itself but for the sake of a solution that more effectively addresses the issue. The key here is not to get mired down in creating a grand, super unique idea. More than likely this idea will not be the best idea, rather to keep your mind open while [you create many different ideas](https://glow.williams.edu/courses/2539542/files/folder/readings?preview=153992346) and being open to pick ideas that seem a bit out there.

During reHack at Princeton, I spoke with a designer from IDEO. Throughout our conversation he emphasized the importance of stepping back from the problem presented before you and asking if that was the actual problem at all. This reveals two parts in having diverse ideas. The chances are that one is not an expert in any given field; however, with the appropriate user research, one will have the ability to step back perhaps ask a better question that will open up space to generate better, more diverse ideas.

Of course this is solely on the personal level. On the institutional level, in order to have proper diversity of ideas you need people who have perspectives decentralized from the white male patriarchal, and capitalistic structure. The [case of Tammy Dobbs](theverge.com/2018/3/21/17144260/healthcare-medicaid-algorithm-arkansas-cerebral-palsy) is a great example of what happens when this principle is ignored. The computer scientists were obviously not experts in this field and seemed to consult none of the disabled people who actually used the service, leading to an application riddled not with bugs that threw errors, but bugs that could not serve the end-user it was designed for. Software is meant for people and should be treated as should make their lives easier, not make it more difficult for them to just live day to day. 

 
Software is Meant to be shared
------
Technology can leverage the power of computation to complete tasks that would be very exceedingly complex for the layperson. Due to this, new technology has great potential as a disruptive force meant to challenge dominant structures in society. During the very first session of ideating for the project in Human-Computer Interaction, this was my guiding principle. While this ideal begins to leave the realm of design, it often seems that certain pieces of software are designed with the stakeholder in mind more than the end user. If we were to take the situation of the  [Facebook group outing the college student](https://drive.google.com/file/u/1/d/1Qna8UG2zc2pfcJS5caY9o_dLSwGtX0mI/view?usp=sharing), we can reason that when the privacy policy settings were made in regards to the Facebook policy, it would be more lucrative for Facebook to have group joining broadcast on timelines without thought put into how this would affect people who are part of groups that contain information that would otherwise be damaging to them. Here the disruptive power is in being able to have groups with communities that you otherwise would not reach, but with the wrong end-user in focus, they create a hostile environment for the same person.

While technology cannot always be cheap, software should be cheap. In most cases it can be copied and sent around the world. Going into the class I strongly believed this, and leaving the class I believe it even more. CommUnity is not meant to be a project that makes money or related in anyway to money. As with the previous paragraph, once money enters the equation your actions might begin to diverge from what your actual user would like to see and experience. 

I always believed that design mostly revolved around what colors look good together, and what button placements worked well. However, design’s main strength is in diversity. If something is designed for a wide audience, it has to be able to be used by that wide audience. If there are things that your product simply cannot do for some audiences, this should be advertised and not hidden away or worded confusingly to generate frustration. This means that testing with a very different groups of people is an absolute necessity. 

Test Fast and Furious
------
Test often, just like with coding. When designing something that ostensibly will be used by a great number of people, the first designs will always be very difficult to use. As a designer, and possibly an expert for whichever field you are designing in, it is incredibly easy to create something only you can use. This harkens back to diversity in ideas as it shows in an extreme reason why diversity is necessary. With most first designs, the only person who can really use it properly is the person who designed it. 

Now I could and can not listen to every suggestion given to me. As designers we often had to take a step back and look at the similarities between the critiques to our paper prototype in order to synthesize a design that would answer the core issue. For this reason, I would say a cognitive walkthrough gets through most of the more obvious issues, but actual usability tests have to be conducted in order to discern how the user base will actually use it. 

Keeping in mind the objective of diversity, certain types of testing seems to lend itself to certain pitfalls. While creating personas for communities can help keep groups of people in mind during the design, [user research often is not thorough enough to justify the persona](https://glow.williams.edu/courses/2539542/files/folder/readings?preview=153992303). This leads designers to flatten a group into a single experience that is inaccurate. [This is somewhat similar to focus groups who are used to tell a group of designers what they think is wrong with a design](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/focus-groups/). Often these groups are not representative and having a layman tell someone about their design does not always produce results that the audience the focus group was geared towards enjoys. One on one tests seem to produce far more workable information for the designer to create something that serves the audience. 

 Accessibility should never be considered an extra feature for a product or a constraint. It is an overarching affordance for the people who need it. The chances that one’s user base includes people who will need accessibility options is one hundred percent so there is no sense in putting it off for later in the design process. There is another nuance that sometimes these options will end up clashing, what makes usage easier for one user, makes it more difficult for another. Planning this incorporation from the beginning will allow one to 

Accessibility is not to be tacked on as something extraneous. One accessibility option tends to cascade and present many benefits to other users. Some do contradict, so it is important to be able to direct the options to the people who need them the most. This fact is evident in the era of responsive design. The phone has always had large buttons relative to its’ screen size. As smart phones became ubiquitous, websites and applications started being designed to match their mobile counterparts. This results in large buttons on a larger display with vibrant colors. This makes it much easier for people who have trouble keeping their hands still or people who have trouble seeing certain colors. In the creation of CommUnity this became evident as our design always reflected a mobile first approach that was blown-up in size. When trying to make it as accessible as possible the large and simplistic interface suited it for use by many.

Necessity of Diversity 
------
It also became incredibly evident how design in industry tends to become centralized on the white experience. The original motivating idea behind the design was largely based on an idea I created that centered not only on Black experience, the experience of many people of color. While going through the design process, through the words and actions of the people I interacted with the focus seemed to shift a bit. These people did not have ill intent, but I found myself getting frustrated with their answers. It is simply a fact that there are just many more white people on hand on the secluded Williams Campus. The nature of that will of course be reflected in anything produced here. If CommUnity were a real project to be distributed in the world, it would suffer due to this. With so many white, abled, straight voices being the basis we lose out on the diversity of ideas we otherwise would have had.

If I were to extrapolate this feeling and process to the professional world, it becomes incredibly evident how easy it is for complete swaths of people to be omitted from the various design processes. While this is obviously bad design, in corporate settings with infinitely more resources present than Human-Computer Interaction they limit themselves to this degree by accident and on purpose simply because the cost of being more diverse in the design process is always outweighed by the benefits in their minds. 
	
